---
layout: post
title: Active SLAM
---


<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

# 1. Introduction
<p style="text-align: justify;">
Localization of a robot when the map of the environment is known is a trivial job. But in  scenarios where one is unaware of the environment, it is impossible to localise the robot using traditional localization techniques such as Monte Carlo Localization or using Particle Filters. To address such situations, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) algorithms are being developed over the years. Basically, SLAM is a problem of constructing and updating the map of an unknown environment while simultaneously allowing the robot to localise itself in the built map. There has been a lot of development in this field and some of the SLAM Algorithms are EKF-SLAM, GraphSLAM, ORB-SLAM, RGB-D SLAM etc. Though there is a lot of improvement in the performance with the advancement in the SLAM algorithms, there are still a lot of areas where SLAM fails. One strategy to implement for the betterment of performance is to leverage the robot’s motion to improve the localization and mapping. Active SLAM is formulated as the problem of controlling a robot's motion to minimize the uncertainty of its map representation and localization. 
 </p>
<p style="text-align: justify;">
Active SLAM can also be seen as adding the task of optimal trajectory planning to the SLAM task. This integration allows a mobile robot to perform tasks such as autonomous environment exploration. 
</p>


# 2. Applications 
<p style="text-align: justify;">
Exploring an unknown environment using a mobile robot has been a problem to solve for decades. The applications extend to reconnaissance, rescue missions, cleaning a room, mowing a lawn, etc. Scenarios like these often don’t come with a priori map to work with for the robot. This problem is much harder to solve because most environments are complex, highly dynamic with lots of unknown uncertainties. Moreover, the robot has only access to a limited set of observations because of constraints on motors, limited field of view and noisy measurements from the sensors. In cases where the robot is operating indoors, the GPS sensor won’t be of much use, resulting in no absolute localisation service for the robot. Thus, estimation of robot pose and generating a map with time constraints become an essential and integral part of the robot’s decision making capability. </p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
In ideal situations, a robot must take the least amount of time to explore an unknown map and generate a model of it. To achieve this, the robot has to take optimal decisions in each stage of exploration and move to the next area, which provides maximum information gain. It results in an exploitation and exploration decision making problem. For a robot to choose the best action, out of all the available actions, it has to generate utility by evaluating all the available actions before deciding one. This evaluation process is computationally intensive, and this intensity keeps on increasing with the increase in the unknown space. People followed different approaches to sort this problem out. One such technique involves using multiple cooperating robots to explore the unknown environment. Using a team of multiple robots has its advantages. A team of robots can complete a given task much faster than a single robot. Another significant advantage of using multiple robots is that the information stream from different robots can be merged to provide an optimal estimate of the information. But using multiple robots has its disadvantages. There might be interference between the sensors from different robots, and also there can be a cap on the communication range between these robots. By considering both the utility per action and the cost associated with that action, different robots in the unknown map will be able to select the right action at any given point of time.  </p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
Underwater robotics applications related to science, industrial or safety are mostly conducted in complex environments where the map of the area is not readily available. So, in most cases, these type of operations are generally carried out by a diver or a remote-controlled robot. To autonomously operate in such scenarios, the robot must have capabilities to map an underwater area, localise itself in it and plan its next course of action. Several methods have solved this problem for robots operating in indoor and outdoor environments where some sort of mapping sensor accurately optimal view planning for objects or scene reconstruction. But, underwater systems do not have an accurate positioning system, poor visibility and low reliability of communications. All these inaccuracies lead to a gradual drift of the robot’s position to the actual position of the robot. Active SLAM helps the robot to decide a series of actions that leads to mapping the environment as efficiently as possible. In [], the robot starts by moving to a viewpoint and senses the environment using a mapping sensor. This data is then used in a pose graph algorithm to correct the robot’s pose and the position of the previous viewpoints. The world is represented by a tree with the data gathered from each viewpoint. The robot then chooses the next best viewpoint to explore from a set of candidates from this tree representing the world. The candidate which provides the best utility is selected, and the robot chooses to explore that viewpoint. This process continues until a termination criterion is met.
</p>

# 3. Definition

## Mathematical formulation of SLAM: 

## Algorithm of Active SLAM:

# 4. Key Results

# 5. Active SLAM is a decision making problem 
<p style="text-align: justify;">
Active SLAM's performance will be good if the robot motions are appropriate as in the robot should move in a path where the localization and map uncertainities are very less. So Active SLAM is a decision making problem i.e a decision needs to be made on how the robot should explore the environemnt before going to the planning task. </p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
Active SLAM has its roots in ideas from robotic exploration. It is proved by Thrun in (link to book) that solving the exploration-exploitation dilemma, i.e., finding a balance between visiting new places (exploration) and reducing the uncertainty by re-visiting known areas (exploitation), provides a more efficient alternative with respect to random exploration or pure exploitation. There are several general frameworks for decision making that can be used as backbone for exploration-exploitation decisions, some of which will be discussed in next section. </p>

# 6. Brief description of variants

## Theory of Optimal Experimental Design (TOED)

## Information Theoretic Approaches

## Control Theoretic Approaches 
<p style="text-align: justify;">
As mentioned earlier, Active SLAM involves the planning of efficient paths for an autonomous robot to traverse while doing the SLAM process. It can also be formulated as an optimal trajectory planning problem. Along with the consideration of uncertainties of the sensor measurements, robot and map; it is necessary to account for the dynamic and motion constraints in the planning process. Local planning algorithms like Model Predictive Control (MPC) are suitable for dynamic environments. In many works MPC has been successful for solving the SPLAM (Simultaneous Planning Localization and Mapping) problem. However, it's observed that MPC is incapable of perceiving beyond the set planning horizon. To improve the performance, we can extend the planning horizon but that will exponentially increase the computational costs. This Receding horizon control (a.k.a MPC) also fails to proactively explore as it is not capable of predicting new features. To address this without increasing the costs, an interesting technique has been proposed in the paper (link) that uses an attractor combined with local planning algorithms like MPC in optimal trajectory planning. The attractor enables global information and incorporates high level tasks in the planning process. It is observed that this solution which uses attractor along with local planning strategies perform much better than systems with local planning alone.  </p>

## POMDP 
 
## Bayesian Optimization 

## Efficient Gaussian beliefs propagation


# 7. Discussion of open research questions 
<p style="text-align: justify;">
Active SLAM is still really far away from being used with real applications for everyday use. Some of the problems that require attention are mentioned  below, </p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
 
## Fast and reliable prediction of future states:
In the process of evaluating the next best possible action, the robot might take, a series of evaluation of all the possible actions are considered. These actions are evaluated based on its contributions to aid in the accurate localisation of the robot and to minimise the effort in mapping the environment. From a given position, the robot might have the freedom to perform numerous actions depending on its action set. Thus, the ability to foresee the effect of action with minimum latency becomes essential in the decision-making process. Loop closing is necessary for the robot to reduce uncertainty about its localisation and mapping accuracy. Efficient methods for foreseeing the future effects of performing an action and the effect of loop closing are still under research. Though the process of predicting the future impact of an action is computationally expensive, there are recent advancements by using spectral techniques and deep learning. </p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
 
## When to stop doing active SLAM?
Active SLAM is computationally expensive because of the whole decision-making process happening under the hood. In such cases, there should be a termination criterion that tells the robot to stop doing active SLAM and continue its exploration with passive SLAM. The process of switching back to passive SLAM from active SLAM is mainly done to allocate resources to other tasks that might require attention. This termination criterion is essential because, after some point, too much information will only lead to contradictory results and might end up in non-recoverable states due to several wrong loop closures. </p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
 
## Mathematical guarantees:
Solving the problem of active SLAM exactly is a difficult task. We need more mathematical guarantees and near-optimal policies which will provide more understanding of what to expect from the process. One such effort involved using submodularity in active sensor placements where approximation algorithms with performance bounds were used.  </p>

# 8. References


